# 2025 recap

Two weeks ago I have promised to write about what I learnt in 2025 ([here](https://x.com/mervenoyann/status/1997040301022589161?s=20)). 

I succeeded and failed in a lot of things, have grown a lot in the process. I recently [read](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/970747.Byung_Chul_Han) that we are living in a positivity & transparency society, this often reinforces everyone to share their successes and good times. You compare yourself to others' good sides and feel inadequate, work more, consume more to feel better, which the system wants you to do. Positivity isn't inherently bad, but toxic positivity is, where you avoid negativity. 

**Few facts to digest:** 
- Happiness is not something completely individual, whatever I experienced you probably did as well because the mood is macro, it's societal.
- People across countries used to define themselves as "quite happy". [source](https://oskarwolthoorn.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Demographics-and-hapiness-in-the-world.pdf) This is no longer the case for the people today.
- We are bombarded with ideal humans online, but they are mostly performative. Modern humans in general avoid themselves, because they're less happy and content, constantly feel "behind". My generation is even less capable of sitting with discomfort because we ignore negative part of the life (toxic positivity). 
- The system constantly asks to focus on positives, pushes "art of not giving a fuck", "you can do this" type of mindset, with a ton of positive psychology books and through media. Modern humans in general avoid themselves, because they're less happy and content, believing everyone but them realize their potential, so they constantly feel "behind". The system shifts the blame: _So if you fail, it's completely your fault._ ignoring the class issues. We eat this up, treat our lives as projects and constantly try to improve some metrics, ignore our conditions. I believe in growth, but this is not it.
- As humans, we are all escaping from sitting with ourselves. All the fidgeting, stress eating, excessive sports, overworking, most of them helps get rid of the thoughts. It could also be that you internally think you will be loved more (or receive more attention or approval). Very rarely people are genuinely curious with no expectations of gratification.

## how it all materializes

For the last seven years I have been trying to digest positive psychology, it worked well when I had a ton of energy and living with my family and friends (the first 2-3 years). I worked hard, did a master's at the same time, I was more in flow.

Last four years (after immigration) living alone, I was thinking a lot (living alone does that, it's statistically proven). I was constantly telling myself I should be grateful that I have the perfect life, I'm surrounded by kindest people I can learn from, I have always dreamt of living abroad since childhood. In fact, it takes a long time to make a place home, in the meantime, it's normal to feel alone even if you're surrounded by people. This made me feel form of an emptiness, I couldn't sit with it.

Last two years, living alone, I wanted to make sure to take good care of myself and achieve my goals. I had a bunch of habits to keep myself on track while living alone. I ate same thing every day, have taken French classes, did sports 4x a week, batch meal prep, full-time work, keeping track of macros, supplements, write [book](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/vision-language-models/9798341624030/) on weekends, socialize and more. 

This year, on top of them, I went for a functional medicine doctor, who prescribes an [elimination diet](https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/elimination-diet) and supplements, this was the last straw for burnout. I was too stressed, too controlling over my life, I have broken down mentally. It's insanely counterproductive to do anything for your wellbeing if it increases the stress as it's the #1 detriment to your health. I burnt out, and all the realizations came after that. I also noticed I have social anxiety over French language.

## truly transparent recap

**all the things I succeeded in:**

- I learnt snowboarding and surfing, I started doing it to overcome my mental barriers (you fall a lot, and confidence comes when you sail smoothly).
- I had a big bump in French (A2 → B1).
- I started running, prepared for a 10K for 7 weeks and finished it in 1h 15m (which was shorter than anticipated).
- I got rid of some of my health issues through eating well & working out. I went through a lot 10 years ago, had few issues left. It's still not perfect but hey.
- Wrote a book. Overall I love working on multimodality so I learnt a ton.
- I worked on many things at my job that I enjoyed and ended up impactful, which is rare.
- Reduced my screen time. I don't like scrolling on social media in general and short form content anyhow, I find it very detrimental to dopamine mechanism.
- I got back to reading books. It's very good to reverse brainrot if you have one.
- Realized a ton of things (see below).

**things I failed at:**

- I was burnt out (wrote above).
- I failed the diet after a month and a half, couldn't finish the procedure.
- I have stopped my French classes and tracking my food/activity, to focus on the book until it's done, so my French might have regressed.
- I am actually still tired as I have to keep writing the book over weekends (at least it is 99% done as of Dec 25). 

Some of the things I learned from the experience:

- **Most important:** home is where you can completely be yourself. You unconsciously filter yourself in other places. People say "life starts outside of your comfort zone", I think once you have satisfied your needs, which includes having connections, you can flow, lock-in, thrive. Having an emotional support system where you can make a living is priceless. It takes time to build home somewhere else.
- Most of the voices critical of you in your head are other people you internalized over time. You just need to notice this and get help. Trust in your potential and don't let the inner critics get ahead of you.
- Also related to above, your perception of life determines your experience as well, because whatever information you receive, you frame it. Assume good intentions, if it's bad, it's on them.
- You have an inner child (id) that lets you enjoy life, and an old person (superego) that keeps your life on track. You need to find balance between them to have a sustainable wellbeing. Being on top of your life is not a default, you should congratulate yourself.
- If you are an immigrant living alone, you have to cheer for yourself and treat yourself kindly. (I think this applies to everyone though)
- Your experience is universal, whatever you go through, others do too. There's no such thing as perfect life. Due to positivity & transparency culture people show the best parts but you eventually learn it's not the complete picture. Many people feel inadequate or "behind", which many previous generations haven't felt, so chances are when you speak to your family they won't get it, because you have a job, you have a roof over your head, it's more than enough (it actually is!).
- Personal development books always tell you you can do xyz, and happiness is individual. You can do xyz but should you? I completely quit them, it's a whole industry. I just read philosophy and psychology now, which I find more genuine with no ulterior motives. 
- You need 7-8 hours of sleep, eat healthy, be physically active. There's no "hack", taking supplements without supervision will mess your system (human body is more complex than you think it is), if you take too much caffeine you will mess your dopamine system, none of these are sustainable, it's not worth messing your health and trying to fix it. 
- **Progress counts.** I learnt this while trying to learn French for my citizenship process. I have been taking classes for the last two years, especially with all the responsibility I have, it's immensely tiring to do context switching. I need to attend the exam in a year, but it feels like I've been learning the language, it's very slow, ungrateful process, I keep forgetting things. I can hold a conversation, my colleagues appreciated me many times, but due to how sluggish the process was, I felt very tired. I am sometimes rejected or people switch to English, I feel disappointed. I overlooked over the process itself. It actually counts, but it's hard to take a step back and see how far you've come when you are so intertwined in the process.

Overall I've grown to be kinder to myself and others and noticed what was wrong with my life and mindset, which matter the most. Sometimes when we constantly move to make our lives _put together_ we don't question our patterns, our counterintuitive habits. We need to stop and do introspection. 

I wrote this blog hoping you can find a piece for yourself in case you think similarly. Remembering that our experience is universal helps a lot. On the next post I will talk about some habits that actually worked for me, and again with complete transparency, because I don't want to paint an ideal picture.